   Mathematics

Class IX (2026 – 27)

Introduction:

The Mathematics curriculum for the Secondary stage has been redesigned in alignment with the
National  Education  Policy  2020  and  the  National  Curriculum  Framework  for  School  Education
(NCF – SE) 2023, prioritizing deep conceptual understanding and logical reasoning. The revised
syllabus  places  strong  emphasis  on  developing  core  mathematical  competencies,  including
communication,
visualisation,  mathematical  modelling,  mathematical
problem-solving,
computational thinking, and data analytics. The syllabus integrate Indian Knowledge System with
contemporary  mathematical  knowledge,  highlighting
Indian
mathematicians  to  foster  a  sense  of  pride  and  historical  context.  A  deliberate  shift  from  rote
that  students  build  deep  conceptual
learning
understanding and logical reasoning rather than mere procedural fluency. Greater emphasis has
been laid on the integration of real-life applications and experiential learning, encouraging students
to  connect  mathematical  concepts  with  everyday  situations  and  cross-disciplinary  contexts.
Greater emphasis has been laid on competency based learning outcomes encouraging students
to  connect  mathematical  concepts  with  everyday  situations  and  inter-disciplinary  contexts.
Continuous  and  holistic  assessment  through  projects,  activities,  and  investigations  forms  an
integral part of the learning process, moving beyond summative examinations.

to  competency-based  education  ensures

rich  contributions  of

the

including  mathematical

At  the  secondary  stage,  the  curriculum  focuses  on  developing  essential  global  mathematical
relations,
competencies,
mathematical modelling and algorithm building, and effective mathematical communication. The
study of the number system, algebra, geometry, mensuration, statistics and probability is designed
to  build  a  strong  foundation  for  higher  education  while  enhancing  functional  life  skills.  The
curriculum thus aims to build rich mathematical learning frameworks not only for higher academic
pursuits but also for the practical demands of life in a rapidly changing, data-driven world.

through  quantities  and

representation

Objectives: The broad objectives of teaching Mathematics at the secondary stage are to help the
learners to:

  develop logical thinking, critical reasoning, and a structured approach to problem-solving;
  build  the  ability  to  recognise,  analyse,  and  solve  diverse  problems  with  confidence  and

adaptability;

  communicate  mathematical  ideas  effectively  using  appropriate  language,  symbols,  and

representations;

  appreciate the beauty, history, and real-life relevance of Mathematics as a discipline;
  connect mathematical concepts to fields such as Science, Technology, Engineering, and

Economics;

  engage in both collaborative and independent mathematical exploration and learning;
  develop habits of precision, accuracy, and logical consistency in mathematical work;
  build confidence to explore, experiment, and grow in mathematical understanding without

fear of failure.

Curricular Goals (CGs) and Competencies (Cs) from the NCF-SE 2023

CG-1: Understands numbers (natural, whole, integer, rational, irrational, and real), ways of
representing numbers, relationships amongst numbers, and number sets.
C-1.1 Develops understanding of numbers, including the set of real numbers and its properties.

CG-2: Builds deductive and inductive logic to prove theorems related to numbers and their
relationships (such as ‘2 is an irrational number’, a recursion relation for Virahanka numbers,
a formula for the sum of the first n square numbers).
C-2.1 Understanding of powers (radical powers) and exponents.

CG-3: Discovers and proves algebraic identities and models real-life situations in the form
of equations to solve them.
C-3.1 States and proves remainder theorem, factor theorem, and division algorithm.
C-3.2  Models  and  solves  contextualised  problems  using  equations  (for  example,  simultaneous
linear equations in two variables or single polynomial equations), and draws conclusions about a
situation being modelled.
C-3.3 Learns Brahmagupta’s quadratic formula (in both symbolic and poetic form) and its derivation,
and uses it to solve some of the poetic puzzles of Bhaskara as well as modern-day problems.

CG-4:  Analyses  characteristics  and  properties  of  two-dimensional  geometric  shapes,  and
develops mathematical arguments to explain geometric relationships.
C-4.1 Describes relationships including congruence of two-dimensional geometric shapes (such as
lines, angles, triangles) to make and test conjectures and solve problems.
C-4.2 Proves theorems using Euclid’s axioms and postulates for triangles and quadrilaterals, and
applies them to solve geometric problems.

C-4.3  Proves  theorems  about  the  geometry  of  a  circle,  including  its  chords,  subtended  angles,
inscribed polygons, and area in terms of pi.
C-4.4  Understands  the  irrationality  of  pi,  the  best  approximations  to  be  discovered  over  human
history, and the first exact formula (infinite series) for pi given by Madhava.
C-4.5  Specifies  locations  and  describes  spatial  relationships  using  coordinate  geometry,  for
example, plotting a pair of linear equations and graphically finding the solution, or finding the area
of triangle with given coordinates as vertices.
C-4.6 Understands the definitions of the basic trigonometric functions, their history and motivation
(including the introduction of the sin and cos functions by Aryabhata using chords), and their utility
across the sciences.

CG-5:  Derives  and  uses  formulae  to  calculate  areas  of  plane  figures,  surface  area,  and
volumes of solid objects.
C-5.1  Visualises,  represents, and  calculates  the area  of a  triangle  using  Heron’s formula  and  its
generalisation to cyclic quadrilaterals given by Brahmagupta’s formula.
C-5.2 Visualises and uses mathematical thinking to discover formulae to calculate surface areas
and  volumes  of  solid  objects  (cubes,  cuboids,  spheres,  hemispheres,  right  circular  cylinders  or
cones, and their combinations).

CG-6: Analyses and interprets data using statistical concepts (such as measures of central
tendency, standard deviations) and probability.
C-6.1 Applies measures of central tendencies, such as mean, median, and mode.
C-6.2 Applies concepts from probability to solve problems on the likelihood of everyday events.

CG-7:  Begins  to  perceive  and  appreciate  the  axiomatic  and  deductive  structure  of
Mathematics.
C-7.1  Proves  mathematical  statements  and  carries  out  geometric  constructions  using  stated
assumptions, axioms, postulates, definitions, and mathematics vocabulary.
C-7.2 Visualises and appreciates geometric proofs for algebraic identities and other ‘proofs without
words’.
C-7.3 Proves theorems using Euclid’s axioms and postulates for angles, triangles, quadrilaterals,
circles, area-related theorems for triangles, and parallelograms.
C-7.4  Constructs  different  geometrical  shapes  like  bisectors  of  line  segments,  angles  and  their
bisectors, triangles, and other polygons, satisfying given constraints.

CG-8:  Builds  skills,  such  as  visualisation,  optimisation,  representation,  and  mathematical
modelling along with their application in daily life.
C-8.1  Models  daily-life  phenomena  and  uses  representations,  such  as  graphs,  tables,  and
equations to draw conclusions.
C-8.2  Uses  two-dimensional  representations  of  three-dimensional  objects  to  visualise  and  solve
problems, such as those involving surface area and volume.
C-8.3  Employs  optimisation  strategies  to  maximise  desired  quantities  (such  as  area,  volume,  or
other output) under given constraints.

CG-9:  Develops  computational  thinking,  i.e.,  deals  with  complex  problems  and  is  able  to
break  them  down  into  a  series  of  simple  problems  that  can  then  be  solved  by  suitable
procedures/algorithms.
C-9.1 Decomposes a problem into sub-problems.
C-9.2 Describes and analyses a sequence of instructions being followed.
C-9.3  Analyses  similarities  and  differences  among  problems  to  make  one  solution  or  procedure
work for multiple problems.
C-9.4 Engages in algorithmic problem-solving to design such solutions.

CG-10: Knows  and appreciates important contributions  of  mathematicians  from India  and
around the world.
C-10.1 Recognises the important contributions made by mathematicians (Indian and others) in the
field of Mathematics (such as the evolution of numbers, geometry, and algebra).
C-10.2  Recognises  modern  contributions  to  Mathematics  made  in  both  India  and  abroad,  and
understands the next frontiers and next major open questions in the field of Mathematics.

CG-11: Explores connections of Mathematics with other subjects.
C-11.1 Applies  mathematical  knowledge  and  tools to analyse  problems  or situations  in multiple
subjects across Science, Social Science, Visual Arts, Music, Vocational Education, and Sports.

COURSE STRUCTURE CLASS – IX

Units  Unit Name

Chapter Name

Marks

I
II

Number System
Algebra

III

IV

Coordinate
Geometry
Geometry

  Number System

Introduction to Polynomials
  Sequences and Progressions
  Exploring Algebraic Identities
  Linear Equations in Two Variables
  Coordinate Geometry



Introduction to Euclid’s Geometry:
Axioms and Postulates

 Circles

  Lines and Angles
  Triangles – Congruence Theorems
  4-gons (Quadrilaterals)

  Area and Perimeter
  Surface Area and Volume
  Statistics


Introduction to Probability

V

Mensuration

VI

Statistics
Probability
  Total

and

07
20

04

25

14

10

80

Chapter
Name

Number
System

Key Concepts

Releva
nt CGs

Competencies

                             Unit 1: Number System                    No. of periods : 12



Introduction to rational
numbers

  Representation of

rational numbers on the
number line
  Density of rational

numbers and its proof
  Finding rational numbers
between any two rational
numbers

  Decimal representation
of rational numbers
Introduction to irrational
numbers



  Proof of irrationality of

√2 and √3

  The square root spiral

CG-1,
C-1.1,
CG-9

The student will be able to:

  Understand the concept of a rational

number.

  Represent rational numbers on the

number line.

  Understand the properties of rational

numbers.

  Explain the concept of density of

rational numbers.

  Compute decimal representation of

rational numbers.

  Understand the concept of irrational

numbers.

  Prove the irrationality.
  Construct the square root spiral.
  Apply computational thinking to
represent rational and irrational

numbers through algorithms and visual
models, generate decimal expansions
systematically, and reason about
numbers using step-by-step logical
procedures.

                                            UNIT II: ALGEBRA                      No. of periods : 66

CG-3,
C-3.2,
CG-9

Introduction
to
Polynomials

  Algebraic expressions
  Definition of a
polynomial.

  Degree of a polynomial
Introduction to linear

polynomials and
applications

  Exploring linear patterns
  Modelling linear growth

and linear decay
  Linear relationships
  Visualising linear
relationships

  Slope and y-intercept of

a line y = ax + b

Sequences
and
Progression
s



Introduction to
sequences

  Explicit or general rule

of a sequence
  Recursive rule of a

CG-11,
C-8.1,
CG-9

sequence

  Arithmetic Progressions


(AP): nth term,
visualising an AP, and
practical contexts
leading to Aps
  Sum of the first n
natural numbers

  Geometric

Progressions (GP): nth
term, visualising a GP,
and practical contexts
leading to GPs

  Applications of GP in

fractals

  Tower of Hanoi puzzle

The student will be able to:

  Understand the meaning of an

algebraic expression.
  Define a polynomial.


Identify the degree, terms and
coefficients of terms in a polynomial.
  Model linear growth and decay using

linear polynomials.

  Explain and identify patterns in linear



relationships.
Identify the slope and y-intercept of a
linear equation in two variables.

  Graph a linear equation in two

variables.

  Use computational thinking to identify
patterns, construct linear expressions,
and systematically represent and
analyse linear relationships using
equations and graphs.

The student will be able to:

•  Understand the concept of a sequence

•

of numbers.
Identify the pattern in a sequence and
predict the next few terms.

•  Determine the recursive and explicit

rules for different sequences.

•  Obtain the terms of sequence given its

recursive and explicit rule.
Identify Arithmetic Progressions (AP).

Identify Geometric Progressions (GP).

•
•  Determine the nth term of an AP.
•  Visualise an AP graphically.
•
•  Determine the nth term of a GP.
•  Visualise a GP graphically.
•  Analyse attributes of fractals using GP.
•  Solve the Tower of Hanoi puzzle.
•  Use computational thinking to identify
patterns, write step-by-step rules, and
model patterns in sequences and
progressions.

Exploring
Algebraic
Identities

  Revisiting algebraic

identities

  Visualising identities
using geometrical
models

  Factorisation of algebraic

expressions using
identities

  More identities and their

applications

  Visualising factorisation
of quadratic expressions
through algebra tiles and
without using algebra
tiles

  Finding new identities
  Simplifying rational



Linear
Equations in
Two
Variables

expressions
Introduction to linear
equations in two
variables through
practical examples

  Solution of linear

equation in two variables:
graphical representation

  Slope-intercept form of
linear equation in two
variables

  Drawing graphs of linear
equations when x and y
assume only certain
values

  Pair of linear equations in

two variables

  Graphical method for
solving a pair of linear
equations in two
variables

  Nature of solutions:
consistency and
inconsistency

  Algebraic methods of
solving a pair of linear
equations: substitution
and elimination method

CG-7,
C-7.2,
CG-9

CG-3,
C-3.2,
C-8.1,
CG-9

The student will be able to:

•  Visualise algebraic identities using

geometric models.

•  Determine the factors of algebraic
expressions using identities.
Interpret factors of quadratic
expressions through geometric
models.

•

•  Find simplified versions of rational

expressions.

•  Use computational thinking strategies,
such as decomposition and step-by-
step procedures to visualise algebraic
identities, factor expressions, and
simplify rational expressions.

The student will be able to:

  Understand the concept of a linear

equation in two variables.

  Graph a pair of linear equations.
  Solve a pair of linear equations

graphically.

  Solve a pair of linear equations

through the methods of substitution
and elimination.

  Determine the nature of solutions of a

pair of linear equations.

  Model and solve contextualised
problems using a pair of linear
equations and draw conclusions.
  Model daily-life phenomena using
representations, such as graphs,
tables, and equations.

  Use computational thinking to

systematically represent, solve, and
interpret pairs of linear equations
through graphs, tables, and step-by-
step procedures.

                             UNIT III: COORDINATE GEOMETRY          No. of periods : 6

Coordinate
Geometry

  Brief history of

coordinate geometry

  The 2-D Cartesian
coordinate system
  Distance between two
points in the 2-D plane

  Midpoint of the line-

segment between two
points in the 2-D plane

CG-4,
C-4.5,
CG-9

The student will be able to:

  Specify locations and the position of
one point relative to another point
using coordinates.

  Represent a floor plan on a grid using

coordinates.

  Compute the distance between two

points using coordinates.

  Determine whether three points lie in a

straight line using coordinates.

  Compute the position of the midpoint
of a line segment using coordinates.

  Check whether a triangle is right-

angled using coordinates.

  Apply computational thinking to model
situations on the coordinate plane and
verify geometric properties through
systematic reasoning.

                                           UNIT IV: GEOMETRY                         No. of periods : 69

Introduction
to Euclid’s
Geometry:
Axioms and
Postulates

CG-7,
C-7.1,
C-7.3

  History of geometry
  Constructing a square
with a given side as
described in the
Baudhayana’s
Sulbasutras
 Discovering Euclid’s
definitions



  Axioms: Axioms of

measurement and rules
for geometric objects

The student will be able to:

•  Describe how geometry grew from the
practical needs ancient civilisations.
•  Describe contributions of India, Egypt
and Greece to the development of
geometric ideas.

•  Understand the role of definitions,

axioms, and postulates.

•  Explain that there are elements of

plane geometry (point, line, surface)
for which we have an intuitive sense.

•  State the 5 postulates of Euclidean

geometry.

•  Define parallelism of straight lines.
•  Explain the construction of a square as

given in the Sulbasutras.

•  Justify simple constructions using the

axioms.

Lines and
Angles

  Rays and angles
  Measures of angles
Intersecting lines and

angles

  Pairs of angles
  Theorems and examples
on intersecting lines
  Theorems and examples

on parallel lines

CG-7,
C-7.1,
C-7.3,
CG-9

The student will be able to:

•  Explain the notion of an angle.
•  Explain the notion of a ray.
•  Explain that angles are formed

between two rays with a common
starting point.

•  State that a straight angle equals two
right angles and measures 180° while
a right angle measures 90°.

•  Classify angles as acute, right, obtuse,

or reflex.

•  Define parallelism.
•  State and apply the linear pair theorem

and its converse.

•  Follow proof by contradiction in

geometry.

•  Prove that vertically opposite angles

•

are equal.
Identify corresponding, alternate, and
interior angles.

•  Explain transitivity of parallelism.
•  Explain why a triangle must have at

least two acute angles; why it cannot
have two obtuse angles, or all three
angles less than 60°

•  Apply computational thinking to

analyse geometric ideas by breaking
constructions into ordered steps, using
axioms and postulates as rules, and
justifying geometric results through
logical step-by-step reasoning.

Triangles:
Congruence
Theorems

  Practical applications of

The student will be able to:

CG-4,
C 4.1,
C-7.3

triangles

  Proofs of conditions of

congruence of triangles
  Theorems on triangles
  Propositions and their

converse

  Problems based on

applications of theorems
on triangles

•  Explain that a triangle is rigid, unlike a

quadrilateral.
Identify uses of triangle rigidity.

•
•  Explain why triangles give strength and

stability to structures.

•  Describe what it means for two
triangles to be congruent.
Identify correspondence between the
vertices, sides, and angles of two
congruent triangles.

•

•  Use the SAS congruence axiom.
•  Use the SSS congruence condition.
•  Use the ASA congruence condition.
•  Use the RHS congruence condition.
•  Use the AAS congruence condition.
•  Prove the basic properties of isosceles

triangles.

•  Explain the notion of a proposition.
•  Explain the notion of converse of a

•

proposition.
Identify the converse of a given
proposition.

•  Explain that not all converses are true;
use counter examples to show that
some converses are false.

•  Explain why SSA is not, in general, a

valid congruence condition.

4-gons
(Quadrilater
als)

CG-4,
C-4.2,
C-7.3

  Properties of



parallelograms
Important theorems
related to parallelograms
and their proof

  Midpoint theorem and its

applications

  Understanding the notion
of central symmetry in
the context of
parallelograms

Circles

CG-4,
C-7.3,
CG-9

  Practical applications
and uses of circles
  Definitions related to
a circle — centre,
diameter, and radius

  Chords and the

angles they subtend

  Midpoints and
perpendicular
bisectors of chords
  Distance of chords
from the centre

  Subtended angles by

an arc

  Cyclicity of points

•

Identify the situations where SSA is a
valid congruence condition.

•  Justify the role of diagram accuracy.

The student will be able to:

•  Frame a precise definition of a 4-gon.
•  Prove various characterisations of a

parallelogram.

•  Prove the midpoint theorem.
•  Prove a converse of the midpoint

theorem.

•  Prove that the medians of a triangle
are concurrent and each median is
divided in the ratio 2:1 at the point of
concurrence.

•  Prove that the 4-gon formed by joining
the midpoints of a given 4-gon is a
parallelogram.

•  Find the coordinates of the midpoint of
a line segment given its end points and
find the coordinates of the fourth vertex
of a parallelogram given the other
three.

•  Understand reflection and rotation

symmetries of 4-gons.

•  Understand how any 4-gon can tile a

plane.

•  Practice forming logical converses of
statements and asking questions
guided by converses of theorems.
•  Engage in drawing, measurement and

paper manipulation activities to
discover geometric patterns involving
triangles and 4-gons.

The student will be able to:

•  State the definition of a circle.
•  Explain the meanings of the terms
‘chord’, ‘diameter’, ‘radius’, ‘arc’,
‘segment’, and ‘sector’.

•  Explain why there exists a unique
circle through three non-collinear
points.

•  Construct the circumcircle and
circumcentre of a triangle.
•  Describe the location of the

circumcentre for acute, obtuse, and
right-angled triangles.

•  Explain what ‘angle subtended by an

arc at the centre’ means.

•  Explain why ‘equal chords subtend

equal angles at the centre’.

•  Explain why ‘chords that subtend equal

angles at the centre are equal’.

•  Explain why ‘the line from the centre of
a circle to the midpoint of a chord is
perpendicular to the chord’.

•  Explain why ‘a perpendicular from the
centre to a chord bisects the chord’.
•  State the relationship between length
of a chord and its distance from the
centre of the circle.

•  Explain why ‘equal chords are

equidistant from the centre (and
conversely)’.

•  Explain why ‘among unequal chords,
the longer chord is closer to the
centre’.

•  Explain why ‘the diameter is the

longest chord’.

•  Explain why ‘the angle subtended by

an arc at the centre is double the angle
subtended by the arc at any point on
the remaining part of the circle’.
•  Explain why ‘angles in the same
segment of a circle are equal’.

•  Explain why ‘the angle in a semicircle

is a right angle’.

•  Determine when four given points are

concyclic.

•  Explain why ‘a quadrilateral with

supplementary opposite angles is
cyclic, and conversely’.

•  Explain how circular wheels have

•

influenced transport, farming, building,
and technology.
Identify cultural motifs involving circles,
for example, the Dharmachakra,
Ashoka Chakra, Sudarshan Chakra.
•  Use computational thinking to break
down circle-related problems, apply
geometric rules step-by-step, and
verify properties of figures, such as
chords, angles, and cyclic
quadrilaterals through systematic
reasoning.

                                        UNIT V: MENSURATION                    No. of periods : 27

Mensuration
: Area and
Perimeter

  Perimeter of shapes
  Perimeter of a circle:
Introduction to Pi and
its irrationality
  Length of an arc

CG-5,
C-5.1,
CG-9

The student will be able to:

•  Define perimeter as the length around

the boundary of any shape.

•  Explain that the circumference-to-

diameter ratio is constant for all circles.

  Area of shapes:
rectangles,
parallelograms, and
triangles

  Heron’s formula
  Squaring a rectangle:

Proof from
Baudhayana’s
Sulbasutras
  Area of a circle:

derivation

  Area of the sector of

a circle

  Brahmagupta’s

formula for area of a
cyclic 4-gon

  Heron’s formula as a

special case of
Brahmagupta’s
formula

Mensuration
: Surface
Area and
Volume

  Surface areas and
volumes of spheres
(including hemispheres)
and right circular cones

CG-5,
C-5.1,
CG-9

•  List historical approximations to π

(from Archimedes, Aryabhata, and Zu
Chongzhi).

•  Compute the circumference of a circle

and the length of an arc.

•  Apply ideas of circle perimeter and arc-

length to real-world contexts.
•  Explain why a median of a triangle
divides it into two triangles of equal
area.

•  Use Heron’s formula to compute the
area of a triangle from its sides.
•  Explain the classical problem of

‘squaring’ a given shape.

•  Explain how ancient civilisations

approximated the area of a circle.
•  Compute the area of a circle using the

formula.

•  Explain and use the formula for area of

a sector of a circle.

•  Solve problems on areas of sectors

and segments of circles.

•  State Brahmagupta’s formula for the
area of a cyclic quadrilateral in terms
of its sides.

•  Explain why Heron’s formula is a
‘special case’ of Brahmagupta’s
formula.

•  Explain the notion of ‘special case’ and

‘generalisation’ in mathematics.
•  Use computational thinking to break
down shapes, apply step-by-step
methods to calculate perimeter and
area, recognise patterns across
formulae, and understand
generalisation and special cases in
geometry.

The student will be able to:

•  Recognise cuboids and cubes in real-

life situations.

•  Compute the surface area and volume

of a cuboid.

•  Explain how a cube is a ‘special case’

of a cuboid.

•  Describe a right circular cylinder using

its radius and height.

•  Compute the surface area and volume

of a cylinder.

•  Recognise cones in daily life, and

describe them using radius and height.

•  Compute the surface area and volume

of a cone.

•  Recognise a pyramid, and identify its

base and apex.

•  Compute the surface area and volume

of a pyramid.

•  Recognise spheres in real-life

situations.

•  Compute the surface area and volume

of a sphere.

•  Use computational thinking to

systematically calculate, and compare
surface areas and volumes of 3-D
shapes by varying dimensions and
analysing patterns.

                           UNIT VI: STATISTICS AND PROBABILITY       No. of periods : 24

Statistics

  Graphical representation

The student will be able to:

of data

  Measures of central

tendency

CG-6,
C-6.1,
CG–9

Introduction
to
Probability

CG-6,
C-6.2,
CG-9

  Concept of probability
and randomness
  The probability scale
  Empirical probability:

analysing statistical data
and performing
experiments

  Theoretical probability:
sample space and
events

  Representing probability
through tree diagrams
and tables

•  Collect, organise, visualise and

interpret data to answer a statistical
investigative question.

•  Compute and apply weighted average

in different settings.

•  Read and interpret stacked bar graphs

and 100% stacked bar graphs.

•  Apply computational thinking strategies

to analyse real-life data, create
appropriate graphical representations,
and interpret mean, median and mode
for decision-making.

The student will be able to:

•  Understand the concept of

randomness.

•  Describe the likelihood of an event

using the probability scale.

•  Estimate the empirical probability of

the occurrence of an event by
analysing statistical data.

•  Define theoretical probability of an

event.

•  Apply the definition of theoretical

probability to compute the probability
of an event.

•  Compute probability of events with the
help of tree diagrams and tables.
•  Use computational thinking strategies,

such as pattern recognition and
simulation, to model random
experiments and estimate probabilities.

                               MATHEMATICS QUESTION PAPER DESIGN

CLASS – IX (2026-27)

   Time: 3 Hrs.                                                                                                       Max. Marks: 80

S.
No.

1

2

3

Typology of Questions

Remembering: Exhibit memory of previously learned
material by recalling facts, terms, basic concepts, and
answers.
Understanding:  Demonstrate  understanding  of  facts
and
translating,
interpreting, giving descriptions, and stating main ideas

ideas  by  organizing,  comparing,

Applying:  Solve  problems  to  new  situations  by
applying  acquired  knowledge,  facts,  techniques  and
rules in a different way.

Analysing:
Examine and break information into parts by identifying
motives  or causes.  Make  inferences  and find  evidence
to support generalizations

Evaluating:
Present and defend opinions by making judgments about
information, validity of ideas, or quality of work based on
a set of criteria.

Creating:
Compile  information  together  in  a  different  way  by
combining  elements  in  a  new  pattern  or  proposing
alternative solutions

Total
Marks

%
Weightage
(approx.)

43

54

19

24

18

22

Total

80

100

INTERNAL ASSESSMENT

Pen Paper Test and Multiple Assessment  (5+5)

Portfolio

Lab Practical (Lab activities to be done from the prescribed books)

20 MARKS

10 Marks

05 Marks

05 Marks

Prescribed Books:

1.  Mathematics - Textbook for class IX - NCERT Publication
2.  Guidelines for Mathematics Laboratory in Schools, class IX - CBSE Publication
3.   Laboratory Manual - Mathematics, secondary stage - NCERT Publication
4.  Mathematics exemplar problems for class IX, NCERT publication

